Proposal number: 1333894

Proposal: . . . REPAIRING BROKEN ALLIANCES ! . . .

Summary
 

World leaders are seriously concerned that if the fragile NATO Agreement should somehow break apart and the Paris Climate Agreement is unworkable . . these actions will bring social upheaval and chaos to Planet Earth.

                . . NORTH ATLANTIC TREATY ORGANIZATION . .

Many of our world leaders are becoming more and more apprehensive because only 5 of the 28 NATO country members are paying the agreed upon amounts of money that are due each year.

                 . . PARIS CLIMATE AGREEMENT . .

Almost everyone seems to agree that Planet Earth should responsibly focus on moving forward to work together to help neutralize climate change in the future.

However, due to disagreements as to who should absorb the burdens of responsibility remains a huge contributing factor as to why we still have agreements that remain unsigned.

          A Bold Attempt To Find A Responsible Pathway! 


If Planet Earth is to find quality solutions to repair and rebuild broken alliances, we must find the common ground to solicit and obtain the managerial skill-sets of the most elite and successful entrepreneurs on Planet Earth!

This funding would be provided by those countries who allegedly owe past funds that were to be paid to the NATO Alliance.

The managerial duties of this fund could be (using as just one example) the humanitarian, Bill Gates, who has used his own funds and the funds of his trusted friends to save millions of innocent lives on Planet Earth.

This newly created STAND ALONE fund would be  provided by those countries who failed to imburse the NATO Alliance in the past.

Using these funds in association with the transparency and elite managerial skill-sets of the very best that Planet Earth has to offer could help jump-start our global response to climate change and rebuild those alliances we need to stabilize our global security dilemma.

 

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
 

CLIMATE CHANGE AND MEANINGFUL DEBATE ABOUT PROJECT MANAGEMENT SKILLS!

Responsible media carries the burden to create meaningful debate for those who fear that without prudent project management skills . . Planet Earth will continue to tread water and reap chaos until we ultimately become non-existent!

                               We have two options . .

(1) The ongoing anticipated progress that is primarily based on a "business-as-usual" approach to solving the issues of climate change!

(2) The project management skills of elite entrepreneurs who have succeeded in the world of big business!

Media has the power to give or deny their readers the opportunity to compare!

Whether the media steps forward and gives the masses the opportunity to Repair Broken Alliances and have a meaningful debate about who may better perform the project management skills of climate change . . will begin or stop . . HERE!

                       Many lives may hang in the balance!

 

 

Who will take these actions?
 

These factors and variables will be determined by meaningful discussion.

Where will these actions be taken?
 

These factors and variables will be determined by meaningful discussion. 

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
No country selected

Country 2
No country selected

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
 

These factors and variables will be determined by meaningful discussion.

What are other key benefits?
 

These factors and variables will be determined by meaningful discussion.

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
 

These factors and variables will be determined by meaningful discussion.

Timeline
 

These factors and variables will be determined by meaningful discussion.