Proposal number: 1334099

Proposal: ADES: Mobile sales promotion of energy efficient cookstoves in Madagascar

Summary
The proposed project aims to access new markets for energy efficient cookstoves in the North of Madagascar via a mobile sales promotion center. Having procured and equipped a truck to work as mobile sales promotion center, this truck with an escort and project team will visit 5 areas of the project region region each year from 2017 till 2019 to sensitize the population on environmental protection and sustainable use of natural resources as well as energy efficient cooking methods. The project will work with local stakeholders to organize awareness raising events and local media campaigns and will take orders for clean cookstoves from new customers.

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
The project will target 400 000 indirect and 88 000 direct beneficiaries (16 000 Households). The action will cover 15 rural areas at Sofia Region, Northern Madagascar and last over three project years. The project has potential to be replicated in other regions, because the start of actual implementation in August 2017 has been proved to be very promising.

ADES has purchased a truck and is using it as a mobile sensitization and promotion center. The truck also serves as an advertising space, information, presentation, sales and training space as well as housing for the team and office (for order intake and processing, issuing of invoices and guaranties, collection, coordination with ADES center responsible for coordination). A mobile team consisting of ten members visits approximately five areas a year, in order to sensitize the population for environmental protection and a sustainable use of natural resources as well as energy-efficient cooking methods. While the truck is present in the first area for about two months, the mobile team contacts the local authorities, traditional dignitaries as well as local institutions such as schools, churches, cooperatives, women groups, etc. to win them for the organization of events to the respective customs. The animators inform the population about a healthy, balanced diet, the health risks associated with the inhalation of smoke, and the impact of deforestation on their livelihoods. At the same time, they perform cooking demonstrations. The ADES team will also be present in markets and other well-frequented locations as well as in the local media. During its stay in the respective villages the team takes cooker orders and tries to build up a cooperation with local people or organizations. In the evening, the mobile center will present films about the unique flora and fauna, the importance of forest protection or the work of ADES, or other sensitization activities. During the next two months the mobile team will travel to another area, etc.

Project phases: Finished in July 17: tendering, procurement, recruitment, delivery and upgrading of truck, preparing routes and visits in the project area. From August 17 - December 17: Visits of 5 areas to sensitize the population on environmental protection and sustainable use of natural resources as well as energy efficient cooking methods. The project will take orders from new customers and deliver clean cookstoves. January 2018 - December 2018: same activities as in 2017. January 2019 - December 2019: Same activities as in 2018.

Who will take these actions?
ADES Association pour le Développement de l'Energie Solaire Suisse - Madagascar was founded in 2001 in Switzerland as a non-profit organization. ADES is committed to Madagascar for an indefinite period and has set up a sustainable production and sales structure for energy-saving cookstoves, which is supported and coordinated by local employees. The NGO is headquartered in Switzerland. The aim of the association is to promote energy-efficient cooking methods and possibilities for the use of solar energy and / or renewable energies in Madagascar. Another goal is to conserve habitats, reduce deforestation of valuable forests, combat poverty and protect the environment.

ADES as key project implementer runs the mobile center. This center will initially visit rural areas where two Swiss organizations are already present. In the northern part of Sofia, the Aga-Khan Foundation initiated a rural development project in 2005. The introduction and promotion of conservative land treatment and sustainable farming methods as well as the protection of water catchment areas are important components of this project. ADES and Agha-Khan Foundation strive for synergies in the dissemination of environmental issues and the introduction of resource-conserving cooking methods. The use of energy-efficient cookers halves wood consumption and strengthens the existing forestry and afforestation efforts of the population. In various areas of Sofia, the Ecoformation Foundation is committed to the reafforestation and conservation of ecosystems and biospheres and promotes sustainable resource use through agroforestation. With Ecoformation ADES is developing cooperation in the field of environmental awareness and the dissemination of energy-saving cookers.

 

The ADES program office in Madagascar is registered  as a local organization and has an excellent reputation in the country. The visits of the mobile center in the 15 intervention areas are discussed with local authorities, traditional worshipers, local schools, churches, cooperatives and women groups before the ADES project team arrives on the spot. Sensitization events are organized jointly with these stakeholders.

Where will these actions be taken?
The action will take place in 15 rural areas in northern Madagascar (Sofia region).

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
Madagascar

Country 2
No country selected

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
ADES` long term goal is that the Madagascans will have adapted their cooking habits to the use of energy efficient methods. Forests and climate will become better protected through the use of energy efficient cookers and the compensation of CO2 respectively. Households using energy efficient cookstoves cut their firewood or charcoal consumption by half and annually reduce their carbon dioxide emissions by three metric tons. In order to develop yet untapped regions in the North of Madagascar (Sofia Region) for energy efficient cookers, a mobile sales promotion center has been initiated.  Expected results: 1. Increased awareness on health/environmental protection among 400 000 individuals; 2. 16 000 households/other users buy clean cookstoves, save yearly 48 000 tons of wood, protect 4 800 ha forest and reduce CO2-emissions by 48 000 tons per year.

What are other key benefits?
ADES supports with its programme and the proposed action the UN sustainable development goals as follows: The value of the end products produced in the national borders contributes to the national gross domestic product of Madagascar and the production is part of a sustainable industrialization of the country respectively  part of a sustainable and viable infrastructure of the island state. ADES facilitates the transfer of knowledge and technology and improves capacities to mitigate the effects of climate change.

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
The project budget of CHF 1 732 996 mainly consists of the procurement and installation costs for the mobile center of  CHF 358 416 , CHF 421 344 operating and personnel costs for the first three years of the project as well as CHF 800 000 for 16,000 cookers to be produced distributed. 9.7 percent administrative costs come on top.

Madagascar is one of the countries in Africa with difficult weather conditions, cyclones, high erosion and consequently it has a very bad road network. Therefore, a robust truck with a total weight of 12 tons and an all-wheel drive as a promotion center was selected. A Toyota Land Cruiser was selected as an accompanying vehicle. During the rainy season, not all regions are accessible, so that the mobile center will concentrate on medium-sized and larger cities with a better road connection during this time.

The political situation is to be described as predominantly stable after a 5-year transitional phase without elected government. Since January 2014 there is a new elected parliament and elected president. Elections will be held in 2018; actions or unrest could delay the project process. Formal application procedures (in this case, vehicle registration) may be protracted as a result of a lack of legal liability. ADES monitors the political situation / security situation within the framework of a routine risk analysis and has prepared emergency plans for different scenarios. ADES also regularly receive information from European embassies and national colleagues and partners. The use of the mobile center is adapted to the respective security situation.

Through the careful selection of experienced specialists as well as through good planning and training ADES will ensure that people and materials can safely fulfill their mission. Through banking with mobile phones as little cash will be deposited at the mobile center. Gas stations and larger shops accept payments via mobile phone. At the sales offices of the telephone companies, deposits can be made from the sales revenues or new cash can be withdrawn. This should minimize the risk of theft. When planning the route of the mobile center, safe locations (for example, schools, churches) are identified for overnight stays and for day-to-day work.

Timeline
Expected results after 3 years: 1. Increased awareness on health/environmental protection among 400 000 individuals; 2. 16 000 households/other users buy clean cookstoves, save yearly 48 000 tons of wood, protect 4 800 ha forest and reduce CO2-emissions by 48 000 tons per year.

Targeted households use energy efficient cookstoves for a minimum of 5 years (ADES guarantee).

Very likely the proposed project has the potential to be replicated in other parts of the country (e.g. eastern coast).

Using an energy-saving cooker an average household reduces its wood or charcoal consumption by at least half. The energy expenditures of households buying wood or coal are reduced by an amount equal to about one fifth of the Madagascan minimum wage. Thus, more money is available to meet basic needs of the family, for example adequate and balanced nutrition, medication and schooling.

In particular women and children have to spend less time collecting firewood and keeping the cooking fire, and can devote themselves to other activities, e.g. the livelihood of their families. They are less likely to deal with the hazards associated with the collection of wood and the handling of open fires.

About 88,000 people (16,000 households) are reducing their risk of illness and morbidity, because energy-efficient cookstoves emit far less harmful gases and particles than open fires and reduce the risk of fire accidents.

30 ADES's recruited and trained resellers of energy efficient cookstoves permanently earn an income or a sideline.

Project duration: November 2016 - December 2019