Proposal number: 1334089

Proposal: Mother earth is the boss which pays the guardians of the garden

Summary
Economic which is based on earth flourish instead of profit. This economic will be unlink to the current economic and will based on cryptocurrency called Gaia. Mother Earth creates Gaia coins by its development. People, organization, cooperation and nations that contribute to a sustainable environment and the development of nature, will receive payment from Mather Earth. This payment will be in Gaia coins. The value of Gaia coins will depend on the number of people that support human labor for earth interest. Gaia owners will decide in direct democracy on what is the interest of earth.

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
The first step is to collaborate organization, cooperation and people that support Gaia coins. We have developers that willing to create the technology for blockchain cryptocurrency. We develop the decision system.

Who will take these actions?
The crowd wisdom will be collaborate and the society will decide using Co-Play platform.

Gaia wallet will be provided by Sarig platform

Blockchain and Gaia trade will be provided by Wings

Where will these actions be taken?
Israel & USA west cost

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
Israel

Country 2
United States

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
Creating economic which is based on the interest of earth will create more ideas, entrepreneurs and infrastructure for solving climate issues and improving the sustainable of humanity of generations.

What are other key benefits?
CEO's will making decision that not only make profit to the shareholders, but also are creating value to the environment. We are all holding shares in the future of this planet, Gaia makes it present.

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
if this project will recieve support from critical mass of people and organization, the payment could be in Gaia coins.

Timeline
In short-term it will create rewards to those who already benefit earth interest. Cooperation will support human labor as guardians by buying Gaia coins. This will give Gaia value and more people will enter the circle of the guardians. Unemployment people can make a living just by cleaning and taking care of our planet.

In the medium-term it will give a true value rewards for those who take care for the planets and all humanity and not just for themselves. This will change our society to be more altruism and less egoism.

In the long-term I believe it will change our economy to be an eco-system that is part of the earth grow and flourish.
