Proposal number: 1334125

Proposal: A new and easy way to teach sustainability in the classroom

Summary
As the society is moving towards green economy, we need to educate our future generation about sustainability and climate change. We need to prepare them to become a better citizen. One way is to integrate sustainability in the classroom teaching. 

Teachers not equipped to teach about sustainability in a hands-on way inside the curriculum. Currently, it is done as part of extra –curriculum.

We would like to educate young generation about sustainability and accelerate the adoptation of sustainability in our society. 

We want to help teachers to integrate sustainability in their curriculum so that they can teach students in fun and engaging way. 

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
We are creating a new way of learning about sustainability which is combination of visual learning using AR and VR and hardware kits for hands-on training. 

These kits can be used in the classroom easily as part of lessons, super fun and engaging at the same time the satisfy the learning outcomes of the curriculum. 

The new tools which teach students about sustainable cities, sustainable neighbourhood, clean-tech, electric vehicles and social challenges like SDGs. 

Create a education and training platform on different aspects of sustainability (energy, house, water food), this will be used to teach our young generation. 

 

Who will take these actions?
These tools will be developed by us and distributed using schools, parents and government. The students from age group 8-16 years will be using these tools to understand SDGs and apply these concepts in their daily living. 

Teachers training platform will be created where they will be trained to use these kits and how they can adapt in their classroom. 

Where will these actions be taken?
It will start with Vaud canton in Switzerland where there are 8000 students. Then it will be spread to other parts of the switzerland then to other countries.  

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
Switzerland

Country 2
France

Country 3
Germany

Country 4
Austria

Country 5
Netherlands

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
Right now 270 Millions Tons of CO2 in EU/Swiss is emitted (2015). 50% of the emission comes from household emission. We are expecting 10% of household emission reduction by educating children that is 13.5 million tons potentially in EU/Swiss.

What are other key benefits?
It will impact households, cities and whole country on top level. These children educated using our tools which is our future green citizen. 

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
200,000 USD to build the platform and content. We will use crowd generated content and also encourage teachers to put their ideas on sustainability implementation in their classroom which can be shared by other teachers.

Timeline
We are expecting short term (1-10 years) for the education impacts which will effect daily lives. We believe the children are one of the drivers at home and they can push parents to adopt to sustainable living. 

 

Other impact will follow up when they grow up (10-20 years).