Proposal number: 1333927

Proposal: MIEPCO Deep geothermal Lady Lola (A) Australia

Summary
There are many types of "geothermal". Unless you are close to a tectonic plate boundary or volcano, most are marginal or unsuccessful. DEEP geothermal uses deep drilling technology to make marginal resources viable for mass production and applicable for the conversion of existing coal and nuclear power plants to economically viable safe zero emission plants. It has the potential to revolutionize power generation and reverse climate change.

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
We are in the process of building our first pilot project in North Queensland, Australia.

Lady Lola(A) is a 10 to 30M W proof of concept pilot project.

Who will take these actions?
MIEPCO pty ltd is undertaking the project and looking for investment.

Where will these actions be taken?
The pilot is being undertaken in Mount Isa and Townsville in North Queensland, Australia

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
No country selected

Country 2
No country selected

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
The Lady Lola (A) project is only the proof of concept pilot. It's success will make DEEP geothermal technology bankable and investable for large scale projects. It will verify that it is the cheapest economically viable power generation technology and drive its implementation throughout the world. It also has zero emissions. Depending on the number of plants that are built, it has an infinite capacity to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and address climate change.

 

What are other key benefits?
It is a cheaper technology that has zero emissions. It can compete in the existing market to address climate change

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
The Lady Lola A pilot project will cost up to $5 million to get to proof of concept. There after it is fully viable and will return 50c per year for ever $1 invested.

Timeline
In the next 5 years MIEPCO and DEEP geothermal is going to change the renewable energy landscape and there after the world will not be the same. Our goal is to build the biggest renewable energy company in the world. Once proven in Australia we aim to rapidly expand to the USA, Japan, UK and Europe in replacing end of life generation plant with DEEP geothermal zero emission base load generation.
