Proposal number: 1334185

Proposal: design and manufacture of a biofuel production

Summary
The jatropha curcas has been identified as an oleaginous plant with an oil content of about 45%. Different studies have shown that a transesterification of this oil makes it possible to obtain biodiesel. The project involved the design and manufacture of an oilseed press and the design of winnowing equipment and a transesterification unit to convert Jatropha into biodiesel. Seeds of jatropha curcas selected from the northern regions of Cameroon as part of the ESA project were distributed to farmers in Ngaoundere to popularize this plant in Adamaoua

The main long-term objective is the establishment of a biofuel pilot unit; this unit will be duplicated across Africa to contribute to bridging the energy deficit of our continent, through this renewable energy source. In the same way, it will contribute to the reforestation of the continent, especially in the arid zones.

In perspective we also plan the design and manufacture of fireplaces adapted to this fuel to offer rural women an alternative to  the use of coal and wood for cooking which is responsible for the death of 600,000 people per year in Africa, the majority of whom are women and children.   .

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Practice

What actions do you propose?
In this project we aim at the production of biodiesel based on jatropha curcas. Knowing that farmers in arid zones of Africa are the most affected by global warming, this work represents a fantastic opportunity for us to contribute to their adaptation, to regenerate the land, to diversify their income and to increase their capacity of animal production by the introduction of the shells broken and detoxifying of jatropha Curcas. To do this, we will :
-Provide farmers with training and supervision for the cultivation of jatropha curcas;
- purchase all their production to convert it to biodiesel through the production unit;
-broke and detoxify the hulls so that the farmers can integrate it into the feeding of the cattle;

Who will take these actions?
This work is part of the projects we will  implement within AfroGreenTech company of which I am cofounder and CEO and whose objective is to provide the technology and the necessary training to farmers in order to improve their production and transformed it into marketable products. AfroGreenTech will take care of the design and manufacture of biodiesel production units, training and supervision of farmers for the cultivation of jatropha curcas, training of operators and maintenance agents of these units, and and finally set up a spare parts supply chain. This is to create a framework for the implementation of this project project by private actors and agricultural cooperatives.

Where will these actions be taken?
The most suitable climatic conditions for the cultivation of Jatropha curcas are between latitudes 30 ° North and 35 ° South (Source: Jongschaap et al., 2007) this makes possible the cultivation of Jatropha in the majority of the continent except from Europe. this project can therefore be implemented wherever the need arises.

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
Cameroon

Country 2
Chad

Country 3
Sierra Leone

Country 4
Australia

Country 5
Argentina

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
i have not calculate it yet but wath i know is that the substitution of fuel by biofuel will reduce the emission of green house gases. the Jatropha curcas will regenerate the soil in arid areas. The leaves of Jatropha Curcas will absorb the athmospheric CO2. And the farmers will get incomes...

What are other key benefits?
Farmers in rural African localities face enormous financial difficulty because of global warming their plantations are attacked by heat and insects. it mainten and accelerates poverty because of their limited income they do not have access to care the children do not succeed in continuing the studies; thi is how we the rural exodus of youth happens... By this initiative we intend to create enormous employment in rural areas, reduce deforestation and build hope...

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
This project can be launched with approximatively 500,000 USD

because we will need to empower famers to plant it on very big surface

Timeline
The proposal will have an impact in the short term because Jatropha Curcas begin to produce 6 months after plantation and the  plant can live for fifty years

