Proposal number: 1334079

Proposal: Energy generation by using compact group of floating windmills on sea.

Summary
1)  Abundant energy is available on sea in the form of flowing wind.

2) Problem in tapping this wind is due to vibration of waves on sea.

3) This problem can be over come by creating compact group of floating wind mills attached to one another by common shaft on which blades are mounted.

4) This wind mills can be install on nodes of floating hollow pipes network as given in picture with additional floater attached at nodes.

5) This can create a floating farms on sea which will tap wind on sea & generate electricity.

6) This idea if properly implemented has capacity to generate energy require for whole man kind without omitting any green gas.

7) This idea does not require any fuel, radiating material or any harmful material to generate energy.

8) This idea can generate thousand mega watt of energy without any green gas emission.

9) Many compact, floating wind energy farm spread in kilometers on sea will generate total energy need for human on earth is my idea.

10) I have prepare miniature model & test it. This concept is useful for our energy requirement.

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
All countries have to implement this project immediately to protect earth.

Who will take these actions?
All countries have to implement this project immediately to protect earth.

Where will these actions be taken?
All countries have to implement this project immediately to protect earth.

 This is simple but path breaking idea.

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
No country selected

Country 2
No country selected

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
1)This will decrease carbon emission to zero for power generation.

2) This will create very cheap power to everybody on earth.

3) This will reduce the cost of industrial production on earth. 

What are other key benefits?
1)Cheap power.

2) Zero carbon emission.

3) decrease in production cost of industries.

4) Upliftment of poor due to cheap power.

 

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
Initial cost may be billions of dollar but this is one time investment

Timeline
Within 10 years this project can be implement world wide.
