Proposal number: 1334133

Proposal: BMSH Engine: Gravity at work in a new Hydroelectricity: No river or dam required

Summary
I have always had great interest in Physics, however 'fate' made it that I did advanced grad studies in chemistry, instead. I hold a PhD in Chemistry. An electron is a fascinating elementary particle difficult to appreciate until you understand chemical reaction mechanisms within the context of chemical bond continuum. 

Einstein's Theory of General Relativity (ETGR) is certainly an improvement over Newton's understanding of Gravity concept is it allows correct prediction of the orbit of Mercury. Nevertheless, we know that Einstein's Theory becomes useless at microscopic scale, which is the realm of Quantum physics. One universe - Two incompatible theories: That's a scientific problem calling for a resolution.

ETGR may have limited precision but I think it is on the right track, and the idea of the curvature of space-time (dictating how matter moves within gravitational fields) has been an inspiration for my innovative hydrokinetic system, the BMSH Engine.

I believe Gravity is the main force driving/controlling the structure, shape, motion, etc of all systems (planetary, solar, galactic, etc). And by default, all these systems are rather in motion, that is nonzero velocity. Considering how massive these systems are, the energy involved must be equally immense. I therefore imagine that it was possible to design a system (engine) that could simulate a solar system for instance. And BMSH Engine was born.

In essence, BMSH Engine is a hybrid of proven conventional hydropower technologies packaged in a totally new way with surprisingly new outcomes.  The innovation in BMSH Engine eliminates the need for rivers and dams, making it feasible anywhere on Earth at significantly reduced cost and engineering works when compared to traditional hydroelectric plants (with dams or reservoirs) and pumped storage plants. 

 

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Not sure

What actions do you propose?
Although, this innovative technology is amenable to the level of a single household or less, ideally, every city, town or neighborhood (at least 100 houses)  could have its own electricity generating station built locally.

BMSH Engine is also applicable to big ships (intercontinental maritime transport) in substitution for diesel engines.

Who will take these actions?
Where will these actions be taken?
Ontario, Canada or any jurisdiction interested in Green energy solutions 

Worldwide

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
Canada

Country 2
United States

Country 3
China

Country 4
India

Country 5
Congo [DRC]

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
Implementation of this project anywhere would eliminate 100% of CO2 emitted from electricity generation. With unlimited affordable clean electricity, all aspects of life (heating, cooling, transportation, etc) could be electrified.

What are other key benefits?
100% elimination of CO2 emissions from electricity generation.

Limited environmental impact on ecosystem since the plants using BMSH Engine technology can be built close by the consumer of generated electricity.

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
The bigger the project, the cheaper the kWh. I believe this would be cheaper than hydroelectricity, which is currently at approximately $0.08/kWh in Ontario Canada.

 

Timeline
In 15 years, with full or total adaptation, 100% CO2 emission from electricity generation could be eliminated.

The impact is instantaneous upon completion of the installation of BMSH Engine for electricity generation.
