Proposal number: 1334146

Proposal: Hydroelectric energy generation using Flood Water

Summary
This initiative is bored out of the need, desire or burden to solve or proffer solution to combat the flood problem. I thought of the possibility of moving from flood water as problem to flood water as solution. What if we could catch the flood water, what if it could be dammed and used to give us clean energy with no harmful emission while solving part of our energy problem?

Flood waters are usually so much and always surpass it expectation; in terms of the quantity. Several measures have been put in place to reduce the quantity of flood at any time and manage the effects. This proposal intends to create mini or portable dams that would be powered by flood water. Hydroelectric power plant uses a dam to store river water in a reservoir. This water is then released through a turbine which it spins to activate a generator which produces electricity. In this proposal, the river water is to be replaced with flood water which usually comes with a speed. The energy generated could be used or stored in batteries or energy packets that could be used as electrical power source during and even after the flood is over. The energy packet could be rechargeable with other power source. The technology that would be used here is that of an Hydropower plant. Hydropower plants capture the energy of falling water to generate electricity. What is happening is a conversion of energy from one form to another. The kinetic energy in the turbine due to the spinning or moving water is converted to mechanical energy. Then a generator converts the mechanical energy to electrical energy. Conventionally, when hydroelectric energy is generated, it is distributed. This proposal intends to store this energy in energy packets. This is because they may not be efficient enough for distribution, since flood waters are seasonal.

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Not sure

What actions do you propose?
I propose that flood water be channeled in such a way that the energy it generates could be utilize to drive turbines to generate electricity using hydropower plants technology. Engineering design should be made in such a way that when we are preparing for flood, it will not just be in preparation for a disaster but also in readiness to possibly capture and utilize the energy that comes with it. 

No doubt there is need to significantly increase our global energy source, to meet up with development, and we want to achieve this with significantly reduced greenhouse gas emissions. There is also no doubt that flood water could come in huge magnitude that enormously "seems" to be out of control because of the many disasters it has caused. The losses and tragedies that have occurred from flood events are enough to make us come up with alternative solutions, other than managing the events.

Who will take these actions?
These actions are to be taken by governments, scientists and engineers, energy and their related activities companies, communities, economists, academics and tertiary institutions.

Government bodies will lead the drive. They are the corporate body that will direct the management of the affairs. To inform the communities and general public on what the proposal intends to do with flood waters and educate them as appropriate.

Scientists and Engineers, (of which I am a part) are the ones that will describe the formats or plans of the proposal and come up with designs on how to achieve the set out objectives and goals.

Energy and related activities company will most likely finance a major part of the initiative implementation processes with the aim of making profits.

Economists will carry out the economic feasibility of the proposal and the impacts it will have on both local and global economy as a whole.

Academics, students and tertiary institutions are the ones to carry out the many required projects and investigative tests to perfect the process.

Where will these actions be taken?
These actions can be taken in any country where there is flood and there is a need to generate significant amount of energy with reduced greenhouse gas emissions.

This ultimately points to almost everywhere around the globe, because energy need is a global issue. Except for places or situations of drought where of course, there won’t be flood waters.

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
India

Country 2
Ecuador

Country 3
China

Country 4
United States

Country 5
Nigeria

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
What are other key benefits?
Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
Timeline