Proposal number: 1334122

Proposal: Giant Fresnel lens system

Summary


The working temperature of the reflective solar heaters up to 3500oC, there are three demonstration demonstrations in the world, respectively, in Uzbekistan, France and China Ningxia. The lack of the system is complex, the need to build heliometric array and condenser, such as Uzbekistan's solar furnace (solar mirror area of ??3020 square meters, condenser 1840 square meters, power 700 kilowatts, condenser center temperature of more than 3000oC ). Only the condenser of the metal fixed frame reached 20,000 tons, the system covers an area of ??large, since the start in 1977. Built in 1987, with huge investment. It did not promote the application widely.

This project put forward a Heat sink: using combination of the Fresnel lens.

Reinforcement system: In order to expand the lens area, the project uses cable-stayed cable to strengthen the connection skeleton, simplify the skeleton system, reduce the blocking sunshine area.

The structure of the heliostats system:

The system uses the frame to rotate the fixed structure. The lens edge frame and the rear positioning frame are moved on the soft track on the wall. The soft rail receives the support of a plurality of telescopic rods. Extension height of the telescopic support rod is limited by the limit motor control.

Working Table can be fixed on the ground, so that it cannot be limited by the volume, without limiting the complexity of the system and improve mobility flexibility.

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
1.Combined Fresnel Lens Fixed Structure System.

Solar heat receiving device at the bottom of the support frame, splicing combination Fresnel lens in the splicing frame, the center of the stitching frame is the center-cable, the center pole fixed with cable-stayed cable. The support frame has a front foot on the front support wall track, and the rear foot is moved on the rear support wall.

2.Unit of the Combination Fresnel lenses

3.cable-stayed cable



In order to expand the lens area, the project uses cable-stayed cable to strengthen the connection skeleton, simplify the skeleton system, reduced the blocking sunshine area.

Cable-stayed cable structure, and the face of the sun after the occlusion of the situation.

4.Fixed frame

Fixed frame and edge feet

5. The structure of the heliostats system



The location of the movement of the sun is convex in one year, and the route cluster between the high point and the low is the target track of the year.

 Trailing edge are moved on the outer arcuate wall and the inner curved wall, respectively, and the outer curved wall has flexible tracks , the lower part of the flexible track and the upper part of the curved wall are supported by the telescopic jacks, namely the outer arc-shaped wall and the inner curved wall, the combination of Fresnel lens frame Along the circular arc on the curved wall of the flexible track through the adjustable height of the adjustable mandrel to adjust the Fresnel lens to the sun's angle, and ultimately to achieve Fresnel lens spot fixed ground work point.

6.Facing the sun at an angle



Splicing frame within the center of the connecting rod, used to connect the cable-stayed rope, the support frame fixed to the lens edge, splicing frame of some of the intersection as a cable-stayed cable connection point.

7. Heat table



The table is free from the dome system and can be fixed on the ground so that it can be free from volume restrictions without limiting the complexity of the system and improving maneuverability.

Through the through-type reinforced glass, thermal energy can be directly applied to the water vapor, or through the surface with hydrogen catalyst to heat the carrier heat water vapor, to achieve solar energy hydrogen. It can be direct power generation during the day, while the storage of hydrogen and oxygen mixture in the absence of sunny night or cloudy re-burning power generation, which can solve the biggest problem of solar energy - intermittent work.

8. Application

1. Manufacture of hydrogen: the pursuit of the highest solar thermal temperature, used to produce low-cost hydrogen. Limit condenser ratio: 45000; limit condenser temperature of 6000 degrees.

2. Heating molten salt: reserves solar energy,

3.Manufacture of water vapor, drive the engine,

4.Directly drive the engine: the use of high heat generated by the impact of the explosion, direct drive the engine.

Who will take these actions?
1.Start-up companies. Build a team

2.Partner with universities. We may be able to accelerate the research, development, and prototyping phases by collaborating openly with universities.

3. Energy companies

Where will these actions be taken?
American

Research and Development - the author is currently seeking initial private investors to provide funding for research and development.

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
No country selected

Country 2
No country selected

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
1. By achieving the highest solar temperature; improve solar energy efficiency.Through breakthrough temperature to achieve energy the breakthrough.



2. To find the best route of hydrogen production technology, the ultimate realization of water decomposition of hydrogen, instead of electrolysis of water to hydrogen, saving energy consumption.

What are other key benefits?
1. For smelting metal: directly replace the melting furnace, melting high temperature metal.

2. Melting quartz sand, manufacturing glass: Quartz sand, silica sand quickly melts, improve efficiency of high temperature.

3. Seawater desalination: Rapid evaporation of seawater evaporation, condensation and manufacturing fresh water, while extracting sea salt on ultra-high temperature.

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
1. The system is more concentrated, the relative reduction in the size of the project, in addition, the use of glass can be directly used white glass, even plexiglass resin, without plating and backing, greatly reducing the construction costs, because the trough solar Reflective plating mirror is very expensive.

2.Two disadvantages of cost overhead

(1) efficiency is not high: Due to sunlight scattering, reflection, etc., the efficiency coefficient is low, take 30%-40%.



(2) Difficulty in processing: Mold of the Large Fresnel lens units?its machining precision is high.

Timeline
1.Demonstrate?3 months

2.Design: 6 months

3. manufacturing: 6 months

4. Promotion and application: 1 year
