Proposal number: 1333853

Proposal: Moving Freshwater South . . Decreases Migration North!

Summary
According to the World Meteorological Organization (WMO), drought kills and displaces more people than cyclones, floods, and earthquakes combined . . making it the world's most destructive natural hazard.

To help put drought in a simple perspective  . . 'Thermodynamics' naturally occurs when heated air rises up and spreads north and south towards the poles, where it gradually cools and sinks down into the polar regions. Then it flows across the surface of Planet Earth to the equator, where it heats up again and the convective cycle is repeated. 

Due to tragic geographical circumstances - the domino effect and residual fall-out of drought, migration, and chaos in South, Central, North America are moving north!

Most of South America is showing rainfall deficits where the 27 million residents in San Paulo, Brazil are essentially out of water.

Headlines in Central America reported that more than 500,000 families in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras, and Guatemala have nothing to eat due to a record drought.

Venezuela located in the northern part of South America is now starving.

Mexico is withering under the worst drought in 71 years.

Several states in America . . are rapidly running out of water.

Simply put . . heat, drought, and massive migration share the capacity to create human suffering and chaos never seen before on Planet Earth.  

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
 

This Proposal Features Utilizing Existing Infrastructure to Create Lifelines to Survival!

If drought continues to become entrenched, what are the options available to help replenish local, regional, and national reservoirs to supply the essential water needs to the masses at a sustainable level?

According to Ecotech Water, LLC, one percent of the Earth's water is suitable for drinking.

A person must consume around ONE GALLON PER DAY TO MAINTAIN HEALTH IN THE CASE OF EXTREME DROUGHT.

Canada has 7% of the world's renewable freshwater . . which provides America and Canada a unique opportunity to politically, economically, and geographically strengthen their shared border with a lifesaving process.

(1) This process would utilize the oil delivery right-of-ways and infrastructure of pipelines.

(2) This process would also . . utilize many thousands of miles of abandoned railroad corridors in the AMERICAS.  

The AMERICAS (also collectively called AMERICA) encompass the totality of the continents of North and South America.

(3) The combination of these infrastructures and abandoned railroad corridors with polyethylene conduits strategically installed below or (preferably) on top of the land surface of the existing right-of-ways have the potential to transport a freshwater delivery system to replenish our reservoirs and reduce the impact of severe drought.

(One) 72 inch polyethylene conduit will transport 500,000 tons or 120 million gallons of freshwater per day to help replenish our water reservoirs.

[Under extreme drought conditions of one gallon of freshwater per person will help supply the essential life-saving needs to . . 120 million people for one day.]

The Americas has billions upon billions of dollars of under - utilized pipeline and abandoned railroad infrastructure. Everyday (including today) that is wasted by not refilling our reservoirs means we have missed the opportunity to use one conduit to supply the essential life-saving needs to sustain 120 million human beings for one more day.

 

Who will take these actions?
 

This is a planetary emergency that is contingent upon - whether our leaders can set aside the frivolity that drives us  apart and act before the impacts of drought - food - and water becomes irreversibly entrenched.

We must resist the restraints of inaction to release the chaos that has the potential to overcome and take away everything that is meaningful to us as human beings! 

Where will these actions be taken?
Every country in America . . that has the leadership to make prudent decisions!

Especially, the United States of America and Canada. Their leadership is absolutely critical to set the precedent for those countries forming the connections to flow the freshwater from Canada . . to points A - B & C.

Due to tragic geographical circumstances - the domino effect and residual fall-out of drought , migration, and chaos in South, Central, and North America are moving north!

Most of South America is showing rainfall deficits where the 27 million residents in San Paulo, Brazil are essentially out of water.

Headlines in Central America reported that more than 500,000 families in Nicaragua, El Salvador, Honduras , and Guatemala have nothing to eat due to a record drought.

Venezuela located in the northern part of South America is now starving.

Mexico is withering under the worst drought in 71 years.

Several states in America . . are rapidly running out of water.

If America has the opportunity to purchase water from Canada at a fair price and utilize the pipeline right-of-ways and the abandoned railroad corridors of America to lay polyethylene conduits, we may be able to help replenish our city water reservoirs and help those who have abandoned the countryside in their search for a drink of water!

  

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
Brazil

Country 2
Nicaragua

Country 3
Venezuela

Country 4
Mexico

Country 5
Honduras

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
Common sense and the annuals of history records that chaos produces fire & smoke & smoke & smoke!

This proposal is designed to help us prepare and adjust while we still have a little time.

What are other key benefits?
(One 72 inch polyethylene conduit will transport 500, 000 tons or 120 million gallons of freshwater per day to help replenish our water reservoirs.

(Two 72 inch polyethylene conduits will transport 240 million gallons of freshwater per day to replenish our water reservoirs.

[Under extreme drought conditions, this will help supply the one gallon of water per day - life saving needs to  . . 240 million people for one day.]

(Please note : Conduits are variables where smaller or larger diameter conduits may be used contingent upon the situation.)

Hopefully, if the merits of this cooperative process proves to be successful between the governments of Canada and America . . these actions could serve as an example to be duplicated locally, regionally, and nationally to strengthen the international bonds between other countries and their states to help reduce the impacts of suffering and drought as a result of climate change. 

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
The estimated cost of (one) 72 inch diameter polyethylene conduit is $320 USD per lineal foot.

1/4 mile ='s $422,400 . . . 1/2 mile ='s $844,800 . . .1 mile ='s $1,689,600 

This cost does not factor in the cost and variables of freight and labor associated with the application - which will fluctuate from location.

http://www.weholite.co.uk

Timeline
 

The overlapping domino effect created by drought to chaos sufficiently warrants this situation a planetary emergency! 
