Proposal number: 1333943

Proposal: Empowering women farmers for Climate Smart Agriculter throug ICTs

Summary
Goal: Empowering vulnerable women farmers through using ICTs promoting climate smart agriculture to achieve food and nutrition security in southern coastal area of Bangladesh. Objectives: • Capacity building of disadvantage women farmers to information and communication technology based climate smart farming, response in early warning system in disaster period and selling chemical free nutritious food in virtual market using e- commerce/m-commerce. • Develop a public oriented Smartphone application to build a global branded online based agriculture market where women farmers can easily showcase their products and get actual price without any discrimination & harassment. • Strengthening women farmers club and co-operative organization as climate smart farming knowledge hub and ICT equipping to move as one stop center which ensures women farmers access to information and technologies. • Establishing women’s farmers rights and climate justice through mass/media campaign, lobby's and evidence based advocacy to influencing policymaker’s way forward to food & nutrition secured Bangladesh. Target 2 Districts, 6 Union Parishads. 9 Kishani club in per union, 25 members each club Tottal: 54 Kishani club, 1350 women farmers’ members. Method: Production >> Marketing & Trade >> Giving voices Kishani will promote climate-smart agricultural resources for women and marginalized communities through innovative technology using ICTs. A mobile app will be developed. This app will enable farmers to getting right price. To educate women farmers in Kishani we well establish climate smart agricultural information center; developing & regular updating customized software; disseminating seasonal agro-meteorological, soil & hydro-logical information relating to crop suitability using cellular phone.

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
Partnership building with stakeholder. Anticipated Impact: The project is anticipated to increase food production, ensure right market price and, hence, improve food & nutrition security. In the long run, it will be an integrated service for farmers, input suppliers and buyers. ?Strengthen Farmers Org. as One stop crisis center Establish women farmer’s groups & co-operative organizations. All Kishani centers, farmer’s organization will electrify & supply digital .

Research: Knowledge dissemination through participatory data collection, resources and need assessments. Create women farmer’s Database. Develop a Mobile Application ? It contains audio/video calling services including information about agriculture, weather forecast, price rate, news, farm advisory etc. Produce materials & Capacity building ? Producing training & campaigning materials (ToT Module, Leaflet, Poster, digital Banner). Organized residential training program on technology based organic farming, online marketing & financial inclusion for women farmers & service providers and agricultural extension agents. The target audiences are disadvantaged groups. The overall success depends on the effective training on operation of Smartphone by this group. AgriFriend-Youth ? Mobilize a youth group who are ICT & agriculture friendly. They also feel proud for women farmer and their contribution to our green economy. Communication & Integration ? Kishani will disseminate all agriculture & market related information, support advice by Kishani web, Facebook page, Monthly Newsletter, Toll free Kishani call center & skype. Kishani also will make annual study tour for learning exchange with other farmers. Setup Kishani for product marketing ? Kishani center will setup in local and national level in order to market women’s farmers products. Pictures of products including prices will post from here. These centers will be managed by women farmers. Community TV channel operating ? To teach technology based farming community TV is the effective tool for women farmers. This community TV programming will spread government development messages, success stories of women farmers & telecast agriculture related programs including early warning and lifesaving information in natural disaster events. Kishani Annual Conference ? Kishani will organize an annual conference at national level every year to evaluate programs indicators, recognize contributions of women farmers, showcase their success story, knowledge and evidence based advocacy with policy makers for protection of their rights .

Who will take these actions?
Building strong partnership with Women rights, agriculture, and ICT related governmental, non-governmental, farmers’ organization, Banks, Medias, public-private sectors. Official government endorsement will be gained by validation of the irrigation An integrated service program will be established by the participation of NGOs, Department of Agricultural Extension (DAE), Irrigation service providers (ISP) and farmers.

Where will these actions be taken?
Research :  Knowledge dissemination through participatory data collection, resources and need assessments. Create women farmer’s Database. Develop a Mobile Application ? It contains audio/video calling services including information about agriculture, weather forecast, price rate, news, farm advisory etc. Produce materials & Capacity building ? Producing training & campaigning materials (ToT Module, Leaflet, Poster, digital Banner). Organized residential training program on technology based organic farming, online marketing & financial inclusion for women farmers & service providers and agricultural extension agents. The target audiences are disadvantaged groups. The overall success depends on the effective training on operation of Smartphone by this group. AgriFriend-Youth ? Mobilize a youth group who are ICT & agriculture friendly. They also feel proud for women farmer and their contribution to our green economy. Communication & Integration ? Kishani will disseminate all agriculture & market related information, support advice by Kishani web, Facebook page, Monthly Newsletter, Toll free Kishani call center & skype. Kishani also will make annual study tour for learning exchange with other farmers. Setup Kishani for product marketing ? Kishani center will setup in local and national level in order to market women’s farmers products. Pictures of products including prices will post from here. These centers will be managed by women farmers. Community TV channel operating ? To teach technology based farming community TV is the effective tool for women farmers. This community TV programming will spread government development messages, success stories of women farmers & telecast agriculture related programs including early warning and lifesaving information in natural disaster events. Kishani Annual Conference ? Kishani will organize an annual conference at national level every year to evaluate programs indicators, recognize contributions of women farmers, showcase their success story, knowledge and evidence based advocacy with policy makers for protection of their rights .

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
Bangladesh

Country 2
No country selected

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
Women farmers also victim in natural disasters & climate change effects in costal belt. To address this problem and to establish effective communication with women in farming families, it is possible to create women motivators in every village, without heavy financial burden on the Government. This can be done by selecting Kishani (Rural Women Champions) who have taken good initiatives in promoting agricultural production, demonstrated leadership in society and who can influence other women in the village.  To begin with, a few enlightened women who are aware of good agricultural practices and who have demonstrated their leadership capability, can be identified in every village of selected districts.  In this situation Kishani social enterprise Initiatives will merge women in farming and Promoting Climate Smart Agriculture to community based adaptation process in Bangladesh through ICT. As this programme is likely to benefit the country to boost agricultural production, market linkage  and socio-economic development of the rural families, the Governments can take the lead role in launching this initiative with us.

Agriculture is the economical engine of Bangladesh. But women farmer are hidden food producer and also underestimated too. They are also affected of climate change impacts. ICT is the effective tool in climate-smart agriculture to gain fruitful access of ultra poor farmers in local language opposes to print media & community TV. This project was undertaken for the purpose of promoting climate-resilient agricultural practices in Bangladesh using ICTs.

What are other key benefits?
First, women farmers and agricultural supply chain members/ agropenuer  will be given capacity building and training in innovative practices, e-commerce & f-commerce, m banking and technologies for enhancing climate resilience. Women farmers will able log in her ID & entering their forum they can upload the picture of products with price using Kishani mobile application. Viewing the posts in online market, interested consumers will contact and order to her, also give payment in her mobile account. Consumer will get their ordered products via courier services home delivery method. Women farmers can co-operatively sell their products by Union Kishani center. Second, the climate risk management capacity of women farmers including training on as piloting of an early warning system. Finally, Their platform Kishani center will be digitalized as e-earning center & it transform to one stop center for all kind of farmers in 2 hundreds 54 sub-districts. Women farmers would be organized by Kishani social enterprise Initiative to achieve their demands and rights. They also awarded as Shera Kishani (Champaion women farmer) for their dedication and leadership.
In this process, consumers will get to able chemical & pesticide free safe food in cheep rets without involvement of middle man. On the other hand, By impact full Women partnership building in agriculture sector, provide to them useful & time friendly access of information technology, to get exact price and their meaningful dynamic leadership will ensuring food-nutrition security in Bangladesh.

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
Timeline