Proposal number: 1334068

Proposal: VILLAGE ADAPTATION PROJECT

Summary
There is already evidence of the important of climate change on the national economy, with clear signs that the coastal zone, agriculture and water are all affected, as are health and livelihoods especially for women resulting in increasing level of poverty. Climate Change is already affecting national economic output and , therefore Ghana’s long term development prospects.The nation is particularly vulnerable to climate change and variably due to our over reliance on sector like Agriculture that involves Food security are sensitive to Climate change such as forestry, and energy production. More than 80% of the disaster in Ghana are considered to be climate related. Failed crops as a result of heat and drought, stress, floods in Ghana, Drought in the North and the Volta level to generate Electricity power is low and tis has affected national productivity.The Cocoa Industray has been recently in the cocoa produsing regions.

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
TASK

1 -During the first two months the APPLE Programme for Rural Integrated  Adaptation and  Development  will conduct a focus group discussion with opinion leaders, village chiefs, Environnementaliste and teachers to create community-wide concern about Climate Change Adaptation.

2--Once each quarter, the project will identify communities where there are severe Climate Change effects and will liaise with local Environmental protection officers that have identified areas of climate change effect and conduct learn and share with education to enable them mitigate Climate Change situations. The project will build the capacity of 200 women in functional skills  like Beekeeping, Fish farming and dry season gardening activities to be adapted to Climate change

The project will conduct community outreach awareness in the form of demonstration in Climate Change  Adaptation with animation to educate the target communities on Climate Change. At this point, a Platform will be staged for the demostration of cook clean energy  saving stoves like CLEAN COOKING STOVE and Solar other  equipments.

3--Once each month APPLE staff members will be responsible for oversight monitoring of the project and will supervise the implementation of activities by monthly site review meetings of activities. prepare quarterly reports detailing the status of the project. At the end of the project a review will be conducted on the general progress of the project status. This will allow APPLE and to determine whether the strategy on Climate Change Adaptation will requires any changes.The project staff will report to on timely basis for input in the monthly reports structure.APPLE  will manage the field programs by collaboration/planning and execution with each focal person who will be identified from the localities. The project will be monitored by frequent visit to the project districts and active participation in the activities on timely basis in order that the information reaches the target groups on the ground. The final evaluation will take place at the end of the project.

Who will take these actions?
It is expected that female and males will continue to benefit from this Project especially on issues adaptation, resiliencof and mitigating on the effect of Climate Change situation. Youth in Agriculture participant will challenge their view on the subject matter and exhaust the pros and cons in Climate Change and Energy issues as indirect recipients.

The target indirect audience to be reached is 2000 lay women, men and the youth who are not aware of the effect of Climate Change in the districts of Ghana directly and indirectly in the farming communities that have been affected by Climate Change. They will be educated to understand the effects of Climate Change in Ghana through interpersonal activities on Climate Change Mitigation. Elderly people including Traditional leaders between the ages 15 to 80 and above year will diretcly be beneficiaries of the Project such as lay people in the community including farmers.

GENDER

The gender aspect of the Project will target equal groups of male and female in Associations and Opinion Leaders, Parents, Traditional Rulers and Religious group’s fishermen and farmers. Others are traders’ food venders, Fish mongers, Farmers and Construction workers. There will be equity in the delivery of gender information and issues on climate Change.

 

 

Where will these actions be taken?
BONGO DISTRICT OF UPPER EAST REGION IN GHANA. -Bongo District is one of the Thirteen (13) Municipals and Districts in the Upper East Region, with Bongo  as its district capital. The District was established by Legislative Instrument (L.I) 1446.It shares boundaries with Burkina Faso to the North, Kassena-Nankana East District to the West, Bolgatanga Municipal to the South West and Nabdam District to the South East. The population of the municipality according to 2010 population and housing census stands at 84,545 with 40,084 males and 44,461 females.

The Bongo group of soils is developed over Bongo granites. They are characterized by numerous groves of baobab trees. The parent materials of the soils have been known to be very productive due to the high potash and phosphate content of the parent rock. Human population densities on these soils are high.The district lies within the Northern Savannah Zone with one rainy season in a year, The amount of rainfall in the district is offset by the intense drought that precedes the rain and by the very high rate of evaporation that is estimated at 168 cm per annum. The vegetation is that of the Guinea Savannah type. Rivers and streams dry. up during the dry season and the vegetation withers. Farming activities are halted and livestock starved culminating in severe loss of animal weight.
Owing to long periods of intensive farming accompanied by mismanagement of the land, soil exhaustion and erosion are prevalent. Over wide expanses, very severe erosion has resulted in the formation of lithosols.The soils are rich in phosphate and support crops like millet, sorghum, rice, maize, groundnut, cowpea, bambara beans and vegetables. However, the high pressure of population and farming activities on the land have rendered the carrying capacity of the soil very low resulting into low soil fertility, low water holding capacity and susceptible to sheet erosion during the rainy season.
The population in the district is high compared with its land area. This could be interpreted to mean that one person is occupying 0.01 sq km of land. The pattern of farming is therefore fixed

 

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
Ghana

Country 2
No country selected

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
The project when implemented will  encourage the Village communities to stop ore minimize the use wood fuel for cooking that will pollute the atmosphere with gas emission.

The emission to be reduce by 3 %  added to  the  Global emission in Africa

AIM

To promote Climate Change adaptation through livlihood empowermrnt behaviour change among community people especially women in the northern belt of Ghana affected by Climate change..

.

What are other key benefits?
AIM

To promote Climate Change adaptation through livlihood empowermrnt behaviour change among community people.

1- To improuve the capacity of 100 stakeholder farmers groups from 30 communities in 5 community in the Bolgatanga of Upper west Region in Ghana prone to the effect of Climate Change through citizen engagement on climate change Adaptation within 12 months.

2- To demonstrate prevention methods of Climate change adaptation to 2,000 farmers being affected by the effect of Climate change through practical approaches among farmers groups in Bolgatanga of Upper west Region of Ghana prone to the effect of Climate Change within 12 months.

3- To improve monitoring and Evaluation for climate change adaptation and résilient activities among 20 community farmers groups in Bolgatanga of Upper west of Ghana within 12 months.

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
1-The Community People is suspected to be affected by Climate Change in their communities may resist being educated on Adaptation change practices and Mitigation.

1-DISEASES of Climate change can affect women and children.

2-POOR FARM YIELD during Climate Change can creat Poverty among community people.

3-DEVASTATION OF LANDS as result of Climate change can affect crop yields in the target communities.

4--FAMILY BREAK BOWN can occur when there is a sever climate change devastation in the community.

5--JOBLESS NESS could occur as a result of Climate change migration of people to other areas.

6-POVERTY is normally high among women and children in times of the effect of Climate change and affect crops yields and livelihood practices.

Timeline
At the end of the project, 50 women and men from commuity groups will report that they have received functionable Livlihoods training in Fish Farming,Dry Season Gardening and Beekeeping that has Improved their quality of life and are functioning in their chosen activities improved by 70 %.
