Proposal number: 1334114

Proposal: Freshwater Reservoirs in the sea

Summary


Climate change has given rise to extreme weather, where drought has increased.Where the climate is not improved, the collapse of agriculture is not far off. Moreover, if the weather does not improve, drought and desertification will become more and more serious in the Middle East and North Africa.

With the intensification of the global shortage of water resources and drought, utilization of rain water has become a worldwide issue.

We note that there are rivers in the Middle East and North Africa. The water resources of the Nile River in Egypt are quite abundant. The two rivers in the Middle East namely the Euphrates and the Tigris River are rich.

After all the rivers are injected into the sea, the freshwater resources are lost, and the coastal waters are basically desalinated by seawater to obtain domestic water. The cost of desalination is much higher than that of fresh water.

Reservoirs generally built-in the river channel by cutting off from the river. We cannot build a reservoir far away from the river, when the river into the sea, it has been unable to drop the head of the reservoir.

This project presents a method of shutting down fresh water that is in the process of being injected into the oceans and establishing freshwater reservoirs. Constructing floating reservoirs with a flexible bag floating in the sea, support by the sea water itself, used to receive fresh water that will make a payment into the sea, including fixed and movable.

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
1. Fixed: fixed sea surface reservoir



Building a huge reservoir and fresh water injection device in the sea, the proportion of reservoir material is less than the sea water, the library body with flexible materials; there are at least two anti-wave wall at the reservoir body edge, anti-wave wall is hollow body; fresh water into the pipeline Bottom through soft pipes.

2. Movable



It can be dragged to move in the sea reservoir. The flexible material of the reservoir body has traction latitude and longitude. Materials of traction latitude and longitude include agamid, ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene, carbon fiber. Using multi-layer material, the outermost layer can be the scales, the bottom of the scales is the connection layer. Movable reservoirs can be reinforced by latitude and longitude, and meridians are collected as traction lines.3. Reservoir skin structure 1: for fixed and movable

The reservoir wall is composed of multi-layer material, which includes: protective layer, elastic layer, transition layer, cell layer, protective layer, isolation layer. Materials include fibrous materials: polyester polypropylene nylon; glass fiber; rubber material; plastic film: polyethylene PVC, and silicon coating. Anti-wave enclosures with foam. The advantages of floating can avoid submarine reefs. Hard objects, debris scratched soft skin, floating buoyancy is from the cell layer and the proportion of fresh water slightly is lower than the proportion of seawater.

4. Reservoir structure 2: for fixed type



see Bottle-Brick Block project

The reservoir body may also be made of hollowly-inserted resin bottle units. Part of the unit hollow bottle filled with water, part of the air filled to ensure that the reservoir body floating on the sea. See: Related proposal--Bottle-Brick Block

5. Reservoir Freshwater Source:

Movable: freshwater river into the sea, there are sedimentation tank in the middle of a water injection, there is a pool before the river into the sea, the river water can be clarified and produces precipitate on the bottom of the pool

Fixed: submarine pipeline connected to the sedimentation tank, and add fresh water by gravity.



Who will take these actions?
1.Start-up companies

2. Water shortages National governments,

3.Water companies.

Where will these actions be taken?
The Middle East, Africa, California and other water shortages

1. Middle East



2.North Africa 



3.California, American

3.1. lead the klamath river and the Colombian river into Southern California



2. Lead the Sacramento River into Southern California

?

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
No country selected

Country 2
No country selected

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
1. For the water dispenser

Including regional swap, seasonal adjustment, the annual adjustment, dry and wet swap



Including regional swap, seasonal adjustment, the annual adjustment, dry and wet swap

2. Instead of desalination to save energy

More than 1,500 desalination plants have been built-in the Persian Gulf and the Mediterranean coast to provide drinking water for North Africa and the Middle East, which account for two thirds of the world's desalinated water. These desalination plants take salt water or brackish water, either by heating, vaporizing the salt and then separating the impurities, or filtering. According to the World Environment Foundation, an environmental organization, it is an "expensive, high - energy way to get fresh water from greenhouse gas emissions."

 

What are other key benefits?
Avoid war:

The water scarcity crisis may be an important incentive for the Middle East conflict, there have been 46 countries and 2.7 billion people are in constant conflict, the most serious is in the Middle East, Central Asia and North Africa.

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
The cost of the reservoir depends on the cost of the composite belt or the cost of the hollow bottle.

Refer to the following data:

1.0.5$ - per cubic meter of desalination costs

2.120 - number of desalination plants owned by the UAE, Qatar, Bahrain, Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Iran

3. Middle East countries will invest up to 300 billion US dollars in the construction of water desalination and other water resources projects before 2022.

Timeline
1. Demonstration: 12months

2. Design: 6months

3. Manufacturing: 6months