Proposal number: 1333992

Proposal: Climate Change Communication in Schools in Uganda

Summary
The overall objective of the project is to influence the changing of the mindset, attitudes and character formation of children and the youth in schools to address climate change and natural resources management. The specific objectives are:

To increase and enhance the knowledge base of the students in these schools through awareness creation and provision of information on climate change impacts, mitigation and adaptation. To engage and mobilize the students proactively in climate change adaptation and mitigation issues to effect behavior change and give them the initiative as change agents.To supplement the curriculum by providing hands-on and practical approaches through project based learning as a tool in fight against climate change.

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
1. Increased knowledge base of the students in climate change impacts, mitigation and adaptation.

2. Environment/Young Farmers Clubs empowered with knowledge on climate change.

3. Demonstration woodlots and demonstration agricultural gardens with climate smart approaches established.

4. Climate change debates held in each beneficiary school.

5. Climate Change essay competition in the 10 schools held.

6. Information, Education and Communication materials on climate change mitigation and adaptation in schools produced.

Who will take these actions?
Wakiso District Local Government - The District Education Office and the District Natural Resources Office to combine efforts in selecting schools and be part of the implementation plan.

Kira Town Council - Select and supervise schools in the urban setting

Tree Talk Plus - Lead institution in the implementation of the project

Where will these actions be taken?
The Project will be implemented in Uganda, Africa. The selected district where this will happen is Wakiso District Local Government. 10 Schools will be piloted and through a sustainability initiative of Tree Talk Plus, more schools will be encouraged to scale up the activities to cover all schools in the district

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
Uganda

Country 2
No country selected

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
It is estimated that if each school plants, grows and protects 1 hectare of indigenous trees under an agro-forestry setting, each hectare will sequester approximately 150 tonnes of carbon in a period of 25 year. That means 1500 tonnes of carbon. The spillover effect is that more schools with emulate, copy and replicate the project add to more carbon sequestered. Because of the educational nature of the project, it will contribute to achieving article 6 of the UNFCCC. If all the 250 schools in the district adopt the practice, then the impact is larger.

What are other key benefits?
- Project will make the school environment more conducive for learning.

- for purely rural schools, the shade trees will be occupied during play sessions

- beautification of the environment since most of the schools have populations beyond their carrying capacity.

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
The estimated cost for funding this project is about 10,000 (upper limit). In addition, the schools will provide land for project activities (which adds to the investemnt). The schools will also provide labour for making sure the trees survice - estimated survival rate is above 80% in season 1 of planting with possibility to undertake 'beating up' or replacing the seedling that do not survice

Timeline
Between 1 - 15 years you have youth graduating with knoledge and skills in planting, growing and protection of trees and growing up as responsible citizens. 

Here, there will also be accumulation of carbon stock, contributing to the overall national emission reduction strategy under the REDD+ Strategy

Between 15 - 50 years, there is more carbon sequestered, replication of the initiative across the entire country and more carbon sequestered.

Then a people that live in a healthier environment, with ecological and economic stability. 
