Proposal number: 1333877

Proposal: Portable biogas plants for methane capturing and house hold waste management

Summary
We all know methane is one of the green house gas causing climate change.Just like industries , every house  is generating 2 to 5 kg of solid waste everyday and they generate enough methane ,which can fasten the climate change.Portable biogas plant can be installed in all the houses and they can drop the daily generating food waste into the biogas digester . The digester is designed in a such a way that biomethenization process will take place and food waste will be converted to methane and liquid manure. Liquid manure can be used as bio fertilizer by diluting it with equal quantity of water.



 

Portable biogas plants are built using FRP( Fiber reinforced plastic) and it can be fixed in a small area. Usually water jacket models are most efficient among different designs. Here portable biogas plants having two portions ,one is the digester where biomethenization process occurs and another portion where biogas is stored. Both the portions are saperated using water jacket , which is also acting as safety relief when excess gas is produced. 



If we can install portable biogas plants house hold food waste including liquid waste will be converted into biogas . From 1 m3 biogas plant nearly 1000 liters of methane can be capture .It can be equivalent to 14,000 liters of carbon dioxide .captured methane can be used as cooking fuel and it will burn upto 2 hours in single burner stove.



 

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
We propose to install small bio digester across the state of kerala (India) . All the house hold food waste and bio degradable waste to be converted into methane .Nearly 2 crore houses are present in Kerala and  each house can save nearly 250 Liters of methane . combinedly it will be a huge amount of CH4 ,if we can capture those methane using portable biogas plants ,that will be a great movement against climate change. 



For institutions , we can connect human excereta into one digester and that will reduce a large quantities of methane emission into the atmosphere.If we can collect upto 10 tons of biodegradable waste , biogas which can be converted into electricity using generators.It can be suitable for communities who dont have accessibility electric connection ,especially for rural communities . 

Who will take these actions?
It can be done by private and environmental consultancies with the help of government agencies . Government can make mandatory laws to manage waste where it generates and give financial subsidies .Based on solid waste generating ,insititutions can be catogerized .Subsidies and tax benefits also can be given depending upon the environmental impact scores . 

Where will these actions be taken?
This can be done all across India and all around the planet .During the initial period we are implementing in Kerala ,one of the densest state of India where people don't have enough space to dispose their daily waste and depending heavily on fire woods to cook their meals.

 



In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
India

Country 2
No country selected

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
Nearly 2 crores numbers of houses are in kerala .Being one of the consumer based economies of India.We have already installed nearly 250 numbers of biogas digesters across kerala . From our initial analysis every house is generating nearly 2 kgs of bio degradable waste each day which includes food waste .From this waste nearly 1000 Liters of biogas is generating  and it will consist of 40 % of CH 4(Methane). It will be around 250 Liters (Normal atmospheric condition).When Combining this figures, it will be a huge quantity.If this can produce a positive result , it can be implemented all across India and it will be biggest GHG reduction project in the world

.

What are other key benefits?
Apart from Methane capturing biogas plants will produce enough fuel to cook food for one family. In India most of the families are still depends upon firewood and they generate much smoke to initiate lung cancer. Since methane is a gas which burns completely and don't need much maintenance for a long run.Waste coming out from biogas plant can be used as organic fertilizer and it will boost organic farming in houses . 

Hopefully this technology continues to expand and receive both private and government support. Solutions that are easily adopted because of co-benefits, in this case waste management and lower energy costs, should be pursued in the effort to mitigate climate change. Biogas production through methane capture may only address a somewhat small percentage of global GHG emissions, but these small percentages add up.

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
For each house it will cost 20,000 Rs for a house hold biogas plant . To install every house in Kerala government subsidies and corporate social responsibility funds will be required .

Timeline
It will take 10 years to complete the project .