Proposal number: 1334052

Proposal: Are We Introducing Farms to our Schools and Education? //Cultivating Agriculture

Summary
Humanities newfound relationship with nature will help revolutionize our footprint on earth.

Our education has been one of humanities greatest accomplishments, providing individuals with years of work and thought, simplified so that even the youngest mind can learn. The idea here is to revolutionize our education system, ultimately to revolutionize humanities footprint.

Our education system should invest in green houses, farming, and cultivating agricultural lands.

A botanical should be an establishment in our schools. Like a library, or a theater, a botanical garden should take prominence in our schools. This investment would allieviate climat change because, more citizens will be connected to nature and have gardening experiance. This could potentially revolutionize the job industry, given a new set of skills and a new objective. Therefore, our students and citizens have a better understanding of the production of food, farms, sustainability, and life long skills.

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Project

What actions do you propose?
Our Schools, Colleges, and Universities, should invest in farming and teaching agriculture and cultivation. By investing in green houses, and agricultural lands, we will be investing in earth. 

The educational courses should focus on food groups such as fruits and vegetables, vitamins, farming tools, measurements, and much more. Cooking classes can also be an extension of the program.

With produce, the plants can be examined through microscopes, and even compared to local produce, or produce delivered from other cities. The produce can be used to sell at the university grocery store, to supply a restaurant on campus, and more.

Example:

Elementary School:
1st Grade Students will be given a single seed, a clear plastic cup, and soil. Then they will be given the task of watering the plant regularly (measured by tablespoons), and logging their observations in a journal. Finally, until the plant reaches its final stages, students may take the plant home.

In every grade after, students will be given a list of plants, such as seeds, fruits, vegetables, grains to familiarize them with cultivation and farming.

Every year, students will be tasked to cultivate a plant, hence broadening a sense of agriculture in our communities. Ultimately the goal is to bring farms into our cities and schools.

Hint: This method can also branch into cultivating textiles, such as wool, wood, bamboo, etc.

Compost should also be an element in this subject.

Types of Farming that can be explored are:

1. Traditional Farming

2. Green Houses

3. Vertical Farming

4. Aquaponics 

5. Hydriponics

Who will take these actions?
Our Students at our Schools, Colleges, and Universities will take these actions.

Where will these actions be taken?
These actions will be executed at our Schools, Colleges, and Universities.

Ultimately, our cities should become more green, therefore alleviating global warming.

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
United States

Country 2
No country selected

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
These actions will help alleviate greenhouse gas emissions, because of the influx of plants that will increase. These plants will convert the gas emissions to oxygen.

With deforestation cutting at large, the rates of carbon converting to oxygen has become largely unbalanced. If we can plant more vegetation, we can possibly put carbon and oxygen into balance again.

Of course, there are lots of factors that come into play for greenhouse gases, but this new lifestyle will hopefully create a new understanding of what is important for earth, life, and human nature.

Humanities newfound relationship with nature will help revolutionize our footprint on earth.

What are other key benefits?
There will be an abundance of food. This new way of education will focus on humanities relationship with nature.

Ultimately, this project will also open a path to new job perspectives. 

Farming and agriculture will evolve, such that instead of working in the many retail stores and companies in the cities, people will now be working on farms in the cities. Flower shops, strawberry farms, multi-grain farms, etc.

Because plants will be in the cities, we can more closely observe the cities carbon dioxide on plants, and ultimaty earth.

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
This section will require more time.

Costs:

1) Water per lbs or gallon

2) Total number or seeds

3) Cost of greenhouses

4) Cost per botanical

5) Etc

 

Costs/Challenges

Some challenges might include accessibility to water, as some areas are not water abundant. There are some solutions to this, though this will require more resources, research, and negotiation.

Another challenge is the recognition of this idea, and allowing it to expand to the greater society. As with any idea, this proposal hopes to gain recognition, with plans to be a part of human culture, the greater society.

Timeline
This project requires careful planning.

How to make this possible:

1. First, we will need to write a blueprint and structure for this new plan. Such as what plants to teach per year and how many.

2. Second, we need to write an instruction manual on how to cultivate them.

3. Then we need to project the overall cost of the entire project. 

4. We need to then implement this new criteria in our schools.

5. This plan is projected to create a new job outlook, though vaguely speaking.

Estimated, this might take 2 to 3 years to implement.

Of course, this project is still in its proposal stages and will work its way into detail as time progresses.
