Proposal number: 1334097

Proposal: Waste, A source of Resource - Learn to Empower

Summary
In the era of globalization consumption fashionable clothes states the class of a society. The world of fashion may be stylish, glamorous and exciting, but its impact on environment is worsening day by day. , Bangladesh where RMG sectors are blooming and increasing the greenhouse gas emission.There are 8000 registered garment factories in Bangladesh.There is no Jhuta processing system in here. Few recognized garment factories export their cutting waste/ Jhuta (1 sack = 100 BDT). Most well-known garment factories dump their cutting waste in landfill area because the selling price of jhuta is cost effective. Most garment factories can’t do this Jhuta business due to local influential mobs, murders etc. Many report claims that there are approximately 13 thousands criminals who have become desperate across the country including capital. Only in Narayanganj, there are 20 groups and each group has minimum 150 criminals. Where the Carbon emitted by these factories make up 5% in the total emission in Bangladesh.11% women of urban area lives below the extreme poverty line.1090000 women live in slums out of which 62% i.e. 700000 are married out of which 54% i.e. 400000 are unemployed. We will utilize this labor force then we can make a huge impact and that is why we are targeting this labor force as our human resource. The textile waste is about 48.17million tons/year out of which is 28.42 million tons/year is cutting waste which emits about 3.19 million tons of Carbon every year. Natural fibers such as cotton, linen etc created from plant-based cellulose like rayon, modal etc are buried in a landfill, in one sense they act like food waste, producing the potent greenhouse gas methane as they degrade. we connect urban waste and poverty where the poor women living in slums squatters affected by waste directly on a daily basis though they summon to produce less waste in the society. The core inputs are knowledge, skills, facilitation, aesthetics, solidarity, values, Social norms

Is this proposal for a practice or a project?
Practice

What actions do you propose?
Initially we wanted to start our project in Dhaka with 75 unemployed housewives from 3 slums in Bangladesh 25 from each and the centers from which they will receive training and knowledge will be the government schools located at Gawair, Uttara; Karail, Banani and  Chalaban, Uttara. While doing a two year research on slum dwellers we realized that the most convenient place to get the slum women is in the schools that is why we chose school as our center point where these women will receive workshop on waste management and training on how to make valuable goods out of cutting waste. The initial timeline for this project is 6 months. Importance of waste management workshop 1stweek in the month of January, For 16 days in the month of January they will receive training on handicraft making out of cutting waste, Then between February and March after every 15 days they will be trained on entrepreneurship so that they acquire the skills required to sell their handcrafted product. They will also be divided into groups of 5 each group will have a leader so that they can practice at each other’s homes and the leader can assist them. Between the month of April, May and June they will create value and will develop the skill required to produce and sell quality handcrafts. The product of handcrafts out of cutting waste include pillow cushions, bags, hijab pins, hair accessories and jewelries which they make and sell.

Timeline- 6 months

Key Resource

4 tons textile cutting waste, Trainee & Trainers

Cost structure

Training cost, cost of raw materials

Goods offers

Pillow cushions, bags, hijab pins, hair accessories and jewelries, medium sized bag

Channels

Direct conversation, Mobile conversation

Customer segment

Local individual buyers, local shops, Retailers, business with relevant products to sell their offerings.

Key Activities

We have selected a convenient government primary school in every community as a training and workshop venue because it is the most accessible place to gather nearest local housewives since most of their kids study in the schools. Each training will have capacity of 25 families.

We organized 3 workshops and training to educate and motivate them.

 

Workshop 1: The workshop on “Importance of waste management” was conducted by environmental activists.

Workshop 2: The workshop on “Entrepreneurship” was conducted by successful female entrepreneurs to understand the core business skill, marketing strategies, creativity and innovation, how to build relationship with customers, making partnership, acquire and develop small scale business.

Training: Housewives were trained by handicraft professionals on how to craft out of cutting waste to build efficiency. This training took place for 15 days.

 

Who will take these actions?
Trainees, Environment activist, housewives, different stakeholders, trainers.

Author's role: 

1. Making partnership with Government primary schools as the workshops and training venue.

2. Making partnership with different stakeholders

3. Getting and managing professional trainers

3. Select unemployed housewives 

4. Monitor the whole process

Where will these actions be taken?
Actions will be taken in the communities where textile industries are located primarily in Dhaka city which is known for flourishing place for the RMG sector. This proposal mainly targets to reduce carbon emmisions from textile cutting waste in textile industrial area. In order to gain access to housewives we make partnership with government primary schools and conduct workshops and training there during after school hours. The government schools located at Gawair, Uttara; Karail, Banani and  Chalaban, Uttara. Our target is to reduce poverty and carbon emmision providing opportunities to housewives in Bangladesh.

We intend to inrease national GDP through the utilization of 45% housewives who are currently unemployed. It also reduces 28.42 million tons cutting waste which has huge impact on climate change.

In addition, specify the country or countries where these actions will be taken.
Bangladesh

Country 2
No country selected

Country 3
No country selected

Country 4
No country selected

Country 5
No country selected

Impact/Benefits
What impact will these actions have on greenhouse gas emissions and/or adapting to climate change?
This proposal is the most innovative way of addressing the current CO2 emissions in the atmosphere. Countries like China, India, Bangladesh where RMG sectors are blooming and also increasing the greenhouse gas emission. And RMG will grow in future. The world of fashion may be stylish, glamorous and exciting, but its impact on environment is worsening day by day. Garments waste 5% of the country’s CO2 production annually. Each garment produces 6000 tons textile waste per year. 59% of these are cutting waste called “JHUTA” in our country. Each garment produce (6000 X 59%) = 3540 tons/year cutting waste. All the garment factories produce 28.42 million tons cutting waste annually.

Participants are estimated to sell their products by the month of June and the average estimate calculation that they will be making is 5000 taka a month. We will be working with 4 tons of cutting waste where our waste benefits will be   3920 kilograms of textile cutting waste and our Carbon savings will be 0.017 tons with a QALY of 2000tk and Social returns on Investment (SROI) is 2.4Tk. The SROI we calculated is only for the 75 unemployed housewives so one can only imagine the impact when this project will be applied on 400000 current existing unemployed housewives in Bangladesh living in slums we believed that we will be able to reduce 28.42 million tons of cutting waste decreasing about 3.15 million tons of Carbon emissions which will create a huge impact in the climate. Will be able to reduce millions tons of cutting waste in RMG centered developing countries which will be able to reduce at least 2% of every RMG centered developing countries’ carbon emissions bringing a sustainable change where women will empower and develop so as to contribute to national GDP which will strive to decrease poverty.

What are other key benefits?
Will be able to reduce millions tons of cutting waste in RMG centered developing countries which will be able to reduce at least 2% of every RMG centered developing countries’ carbon emissions bringing a sustainable change where women will empower and develop so as to contribute to national GDP which will strive to decrease poverty. Our focused outcome is that they will have improvement in their quality of life. Where they will dwell with better sanitation and hygiene, with the earning income they will be able to save more capital. And with that savings they will be able to invest on things more profitable which will help sustain their quality of life.

Costs/Challenges
What are the proposal’s projected costs?
This project is quite inexpensive because our process of accessing is very convenient to fulfill our project goal. The cost to be considered is the cost of trainers and training conducted. The networking can be built within the stakeholders since the women receiving the trainings can inform their neighbors and their neighbors can advocate to other communities which is more authentic since they are listening from genuine source. Since this is direct one to one communication there is no need of logistic support at the primary stage.

Workshops- 60000 
Raw Cutting materials- 49000
Raw materials – 20000
Transport- 20000
Refreshment – 10000
total - 169000
 

Timeline
 Short term- The entire project will be take place for 6 months monitoring and evaluation included.

1. Workshop 1 will be on Importance of Waste management which will be conducted on January for 1 day.

2. Training on Making Handicraft from textile cutting waste on January for 16 days.

3. Training on Entrepreneurship on February and March for 4 days (after every 15 days).

4. Group Formation & continuation on February and March. It includes 

Each school will have 5 groups
Select a group leader
Practice at home under the supervision of group leader (4days in a week)
Value creation Process  on April, may and june. It includes

Acquire & Develop
Produce & sell (Regularly)
From July to December will be follow up on the process.

Next 3 years we will replicate the same designed project arcoss the Dhaka city. Once we are able to successfully execute our project across Dhaka we will replicate this project in Chittagong which is another growing RMG oriented port city in our country.

